--- PAGE 1 ---
Booklet on
SECURITIES
MARKET
UNDERSTANDING FROM
INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE
IPFT
--- PAGE 2 ---
Disclaimer:
While every effort has been made to avoid errors or omission in this publication, publishers are not
liable for any damage or loss to anyone,of any kind, in any manner from use of this material.
Prepared Jointly by:
Securities and Exchange Board of India
BSE Limited
National Securities Depository Limited
National Stock Exchange of India Limited
Central Depository Services (India) Limited
Metropolitan Stock Exchange of India Limited
Printed by:
SEBI
Date: 23rd Nov, 2020
Note for Reader:
This booklet is aimed at providing you in brief, basic information about the securities market. In case
of further queries, you may visit online material at websites of SEBI, BSE, NSE, MSEI, NSDL and CDSL.
“The information contained in this material is for only educational and awareness purposes related to
securities market and shall be used for non-profitable, educational and awareness activities for
general public only.
No part of this material can be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means or reproduced on
any disc, tape, perforate media or other information storage device, etc. without acknowledging the
SEBI or Stock Exchange or Depositories.
SEBI or Stock Exchange or Depositories shall not be responsible for any damage or loss to any one, of
any manner, from use of this material.
Every effort has been made to avoid errors or omissions in this material. For recent market
developments and initiatives, readers are requested to refer to recent laws, guidelines, directives
framed thereunder and other relevant documents, as being declared from time to time. For any
suggestions or feedback, please email us at visitsebi@sebi.gov.in.
--- PAGE 3 ---
Index Page No.
Introduction to Securities Market
1 Regulatory Framework for Securities Market 02
2 What are Securities and Securities Market? 03
3 Primary Market and Secondary Market 05
4 Who are the Market Infrastructure Institutions and Market 07
Intermediaries in the Securities Market?
Basics of Investing
5 Key Risks in Investing in Securities Market 09
6 How to Mitigate the Risk? 10
Account Opening Process
7 Pre-requisites for Investing in Securities Market 10
8 Procedure for opening an account: Know Your Client (KYC) Process 11
9 Basic Services Demat Account (BSDA) 12
10 Power of Attorney 13
11 Nomination 14
How do I Invest in Securities Market?
12 Investment through Primary Market 14
13 Process of investing in Primary Market 15
14 Application Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA) 16
15 Investment through Secondary Market 16
16 Trading Days and Trading & Settlement of trades 17
17 Contract Note 18
18 SMS and Email alert to Investors 19
19 Running Account Authorization 20
20 Trade Verification 20
21 What is Margin Money? 21
22 Statement of Account from Stock Broker and Depository 21
Participants
23 Consolidated Account Statement (CAS) 22
24 Derivatives Market 22
Mutual Funds and ETFs
25 Mutual Funds 23
26 How to invest in Mutual Funds? 24
27 Product labelling in Mutual Funds 24
28 Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) 25
Grievance Redressal in Securities Market
29 SEBI Complaints Redress System (SCORES) 25
30 Investor Services Cell of Stock Exchange and Depository 26
31 Arbitration Mechanism 27
--- PAGE 4 ---
Information about Unclaimed Shares/ Unpaid Dividend Amount – IEPF 27
ANNEXURE
32 Annexure – I Do’s and Don’t’s of Investing/ trading in securities 28
Introduction to Securities Market
market
1 Regulatory Framework for Securities Market 02 33 Annexure – II Rights and Obligations of Investors 30
2 What are Securities and Securities Market? 03 34 Annexure – III Caution against Unregistered Investment Advisers 31
3 Primary Market and Secondary Market 05 35 Annexure – IV Unified Payment Interface (UPI) in ASBA 34
4 Who are the Market Infrastructure Institutions and Market 07 36 Annexure – V Glossary 35
Intermediaries in the Securities Market?
Basics of Investing
5 Key Risks in Investing in Securities Market 09
6 How to Mitigate the Risk? 10
Account Opening Process
7 Pre-requisites for Investing in Securities Market 10
8 Procedure for opening an account: Know Your Client (KYC) Process 11
9 Basic Services Demat Account (BSDA) 12
10 Power of Attorney 13
11 Nomination 14
How do I Invest in Securities Market?
12 Investment through Primary Market 14
13 Process of investing in Primary Market 15
14 Application Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA) 16
15 Investment through Secondary Market 16
16 Trading Days and Trading & Settlement of trades 17
17 Contract Note 18
18 SMS and Email alert to Investors 19
19 Running Account Authorization 20
20 Trade Verification 20
21 What is Margin Money? 21
22 Statement of Account from Stock Broker and Depository 21
Participants
23 Consolidated Account Statement (CAS) 22
24 Derivatives Market 22
Mutual Funds and ETFs
25 Mutual Funds 23
26 How to invest in Mutual Funds? 24
27 Product labelling in Mutual Funds 24
28 Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) 25
Grievance Redressal in Securities Market
29 SEBI Complaints Redress System (SCORES) 25
30 Investor Services Cell of Stock Exchange and Depository 26
31 Arbitration Mechanism 27
--- PAGE 5 ---
Introduction to Securities Market
Issued by
IPFT
Greetings and Namaste…
Are you an investor who wants to invest in the shares of a company
and in Mutual Funds in the securities market?
If so, you may like to understand the basics of investing in the securities market.
This booklet does not serve as a guide for any specific investment, but it gives basic information
about the securities market. This booklet is not regarding investments in entities under the
framework of other Regulators such as Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
(PFRDA), Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), etc.
Page 01
--- PAGE 6 ---
1
Regulatory Framework for Securities Markets
`
`
`
SELL BUY
`
`
`
The regulation of buying, selling and dealing in securities such as shares of a company, units of
mutual funds, Derivatives, etc. and stock exchanges, commodity derivative exchanges and
depositories comes within the purview of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) in terms
of SEBI Act, 1992 (SEBI Act) and various SEBI regulations/ circulars/ guidelines/ directives.
SEBI was established on April 12, 1992 in accordance with the provisions of the SEBI Act. The
mandate of SEBI is to protect the interests of investors in securities and to promote the
development of, and to regulate the securities market and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
At present, the four main legislations governing “the securities market” are:
A) The SEBI Act, 1992, which empowers SEBI with statutory powers for (i) protecting the
interests of investors in securities, (ii) promoting development of the securities market,
and (iii) regulating the securities market.
B) The Companies Act, 2013, which provides regulations for issuance, allotment and
transfer of securities, and related matters in public issues of securities;
C) The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, which provides for recognition and
regulation of transactions in securities in a Stock Exchange.
D) The Depositories Act, 1996, which provides for electronic maintenance and transfer of
ownership of dematerialized (demat) shares.
Page 02
--- PAGE 7 ---
2
What are Securities and Securities Market?
A. Equity Shares or commonly called as shares, represent a
share of ownership in a company. An investor who invests in
shares of a company is called a shareholder, and is entitled to
receive all corporate benefits, like dividends, out of the profits of
the company. The investor is also entitled to receive the right to
cast a vote with regard to the decision making process of the
company at General meeting of the company.
B. Debt Securities represent money that is borrowed by the
company / institution from an investor and must be repaid to the
investor. Debt securities are also called as debentures or bonds.
An investor who invests in debt securities is entitled to receive
payment of interest/coupons and repayment of principal (i.e. the
money invested). Debt Securities are issued for a fixed term, at
the end of which the securities can be redeemed by the issuer of
securities. Debt securities can be secured (backed by collateral)
or unsecured.
C. Derivatives are financial instruments whose value depends
upon the value of another asset such as shares, debt securities,
commodities, etc. The main types of exchange traded derivatives
are futures and options.
D. Mutual Funds are type of financial instruments made up of a
pool of money collected from many investors. These funds/
mutual funds, then, invest in securities such as shares, bonds,
money market instruments and other assets.
Page 03
--- PAGE 8 ---
Securities Market is a place where companies
can raise funds by issuing securities such as
equity shares, debt securities, etc. to the
investors (public) and also is a place where
investors can buy or sell various securities
(shares, bonds, etc.). Once the shares (or
securities) are issued to the public, the
company is required to list the shares (or
securities) on the recognized stock exchanges.
Securities Market is thus a part of the Capital
Market.
The primary function of the securities market is
to enable allocation of savings from investors
to those who need it. This is done when
investors make investments in securities of
companies / entities which are in need of
funds. The investors are entitled to get benefits
like interest, dividend, capital appreciation,
bonus shares, etc. Such investments
contribute to the economic development of the
country.
Securities market has two interdependent and inseparable segments, which are mentioned as
below:
01 0101Objective: To raise funds
010101
Primary Market
02 0202Includes issuance of new
Securities through IPO, i.e.
Initial Public Offer.
Securities 01 0101Objective: Capital
020202
Appreciation
Market
Secondary Market
01 0201Includes the further trading
Of securities already offered
To the public.
Page 04
--- PAGE 9 ---
3
Primary Market and Secondary Market
Primary Market
Secondary Market
Primary Market: This market is also called as the new issues market where company / institutions
raise funds (capital) from public by issuing new securities (shares, debentures, bonds, etc.).
There are two major types of issuers of securities:
Corporate Entities (companies) which mainly issue equity instruments (shares) and debt
instruments (bonds, debentures, etc.)
Government (Central as well as State) which issues debt securities (dated securities and
treasury bills).
The types of issues made in Primary Market are:
1 Public Issue
Securities are issued to general public and anyone can ` `
subscribe to them. Public issue of equity shares can be
categorized as follows: ` ` `
`
i. Initial Public Offer (IPO): ` ` ` `` ` ` `
An IPO is where first public offer of shares is made by a company. An IPO can be in the following
forms:
Page 05
--- PAGE 10 ---
- Fresh Issue of shares where new shares are issued by the company to the public investors. In
this kind of an issue, the funds of investors will go to the company to be used for the purpose for
which the issue is made.
- Offer for Sale where existing shareholders such as promoters or financial institutions or any
other person offer their holding to the public. In this kind of an issue, the funds of the investors will
go to such sellers of the shares and not to the company.
ii. Follow on Public Offer (FPO):
It is made by an issuer/ company that has already done an IPO in the past and is making a fresh
issue of securities to the public.
2 Preferential Issue
Contract
In this mode of issue, securities are issued to an identified set
of investors like promoters, strategic investors, employees, etc.
3 Rights Issue
When the Company gives its existing shareholders the right to
subscribe to newly issued shares, in proportion to their existing
shareholding, it is called a rights issue.
4 Bonus Issue
When the existing shareholders of a company are issued
additional shares, in proportion to their existing shareholding
and without any additional cost, then it is called a bonus
issue.
In order to raise funds from public, companies need to file an offer document with SEBI which is
called as the draft red herring prospectus or the draft prospectus. The prospectus contains details
like the history of the company, details of the promoters, business model, financial history of the
company, risks in that business, purpose for which the money is being raised, terms of issue and
such other information that will help an investor to make an informed decision on investment in
the shares of that company. The securities which are issued in primary market are listed on a
recognized Stock Exchange in less than six (06) working days from the date of the closure of the
issue. The shares are then listed on the recognized stock exchanges, where further trading of the
shares takes place.
The shares allotted by the company are credited in the
Demat account of the investor which is maintained with a
Depository through a SEBI registered Depository
Participant (DP). An investor can sell the shares on the
stock exchanges through a SEBI registered Stock broker
and receive the money.
Secondary market: Once the securities are issued in the primary market, they get listed on the
Stock Exchanges and the investors can buy or sell these listed securities through those Stock
Exchanges. Stock Exchanges have two main segments - Cash Market segment and the Derivatives
Market segment.
Page 06
--- PAGE 11 ---
Market Infrastructure Institutions: The infrastructure to
facilitate the transactions in securities market (viz. issue,
purchase and sale of securities) is provided by Stock
Exchanges, Depositories and Clearing Corporations.
These institutions are known as Market Infrastructure
Institutions (MIIs). A list of SEBI registered market
infrastructure institutions (MIIs) is available on the link:
https://www.sebi.gov.in/intermediaries.html.
The Stock Exchanges provide a nation-wide computerized
screen based trading platform to facilitate buying and
selling of securities, through their registered stock
brokers and at market determined prices, in a fair
manner. The list of SEBI recognized stock exchanges in
India is available on the link:
https://www.sebi.gov.in/stock-exchanges.html.
The major nation-wide stock exchanges are BSE Limited
(BSE), National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE)
and Metropolitan Stock Exchange of India Limited (MSE).
Clearing Corporations: The main function of Clearing
Corporations is to guarantee the settlement of trades
executed on the Stock Exchanges. In other words,
Clearing corporations guarantee that every buyer will get
the securities which are bought by him and every seller of
securities will get money for the securities sold by him.
LLES
BUY
4
Who are the Market Infrastructure Institutions and Market
Intermediaries in the securities market?
Page 07
--- PAGE 12 ---
Depositories: Depositories are institutions that hold
securities of investors in dematerialized / electronic form
and provide demat services to the investors through their
Depository Participants (DP). There are two depositories
in our country namely, National Securities Depository
Limited (NSDL) and Central Depository Services (India)
Limited (CDSL). Under each Depository, there are
registered Depository Participants (DPs) (like branches of
banks), which provide various services to the investors
like opening and maintaining of a Demat account,
dematerialization of shares, etc.
Market Intermediaries are important participants in the
smooth functioning of the primary and the secondary
markets. These market intermediaries support the
process of executing orders for buying or selling of
securities, dealing in securities and providing information
relevant to the trading of securities. Some important
intermediaries are stock brokers, depository participants,
merchant bankers, share and transfer agents, registrars,
etc. All such intermediaries are registered with SEBI and
are required to abide by the prescribed norms to protect
the investors. A list of SEBI recognized market
intermediaries may be accessed on the following link:
https://www.sebi.gov.in.
Basics of Investing
Before you start investing in securities market, you need
to understand and identify your investment goals,
objectives and risk appetite (the extent up to which you
are willing to take risk). Every investment decision should
reflect your needs and requirements and should be as
per your desired preferences. For example, whether you
are willing to invest in safe products which give steady
returns or if you want to take slightly higher risk and invest
in products which may give you higher returns. Every
investment comes with the risk of change in the inherent
`
value of that investment. For example, investment in
shares of automobile industry will attract the risk
attached with the automobile industry (sales may go up or
down or one brand of cars may be sold more than other
brand, etc.)
Once you have decided your goals and identified your risk
appetite, please decide the amount you want to invest
and the time period over which you want to invest. The
ability to take risk differs from investor to investor and
could be dependent on the goals as well as the age of the
investor.
Page 08
--- PAGE 13 ---
The investors should also be well informed about their
rights, responsibilities, Do’s and Don’ts of investing and
these documents are available on the website/s of SEBI
and stock exchanges and depositories. The Do’s and
Don’ts of investing in securities market are also attached
in the Annexure-I of this booklet. In addition to the same,
the rights and obligations of investors are attached in the
Annexure-II of this booklet.
Investors should make informed decision before investing
in the shares of a company. They should carefully read all
the information related to the company such as
disclosures related to the company, its promoters, the
project details, financial details, etc. These details can be
found on the websites of the stock exchanges.
For investing in securities market, investors may also
approach any SEBI registered Investment Adviser. A list of
SEBI registered Investment Adviser(s) may be found on
the following link:
https://www.sebi.gov.in.
However, investors should exercise caution against unsolicited investment advice from
unregistered investment advisers. For details, you may refer Annexure-III of this booklet.
5
Key Risks in Investing in Securities Market
Market risk or Systematic Risk: It refers to the risk faced by investments due to
factors affecting the overall performance of securities and general economy of the
country.
Unsystematic Risk: Unsystematic risk can be described as the risk attached with a
particular company or industry.
Inflation risk: Inflation risk is also called as purchasing power risk. It is defined as
the chance that the cash flows from an investment would lose their value in future
because of a decline in its purchasing power due to inflation.
Liquidity risk: Liquidity risk arises when an investment can’t be bought or sold
quickly enough.
Business Risk: It refers to the risk that a business of a company might be affected
or may stop its operations due to any unfavorable operational, market or financial
situation.
Page 09
--- PAGE 14 ---
Volatility Risk: Volatility risk arises as the Companies’ stock prices may fluctuate
over time.
Currency Risk: It refers to the potential risk of loss from fluctuating foreign
exchange rates that an investor may face when he has invested in foreign currency
or made foreign-currency-traded investments.
6
How to Mitigate the Risk?
The investors can try to mitigate risk by different means. Asset allocation is one strategy through
which an investor can mitigate risk by diversifying their investments into various companies and
asset classes.
Account Opening Process
7
Pre-requisites for Investing in Securities Market
In order to invest in equity shares, an investor needs to open three accounts namely:
BANK ACCOUNT TRADING ACCOUNT DEMAT ACCOUNT
A) Bank account.
B) Trading account or broking account with a SEBI registered stock broker of a recognized Stock
Exchange. This account is used to buy and sell securities on the Stock Exchanges. To open a
trading account, you have to fill ACCOUNT OPENING FORM and submit the signed Know Your Client
(KYC) documents.
Page 10
--- PAGE 15 ---
Take the following precautions while filling up the account opening form:
You should put your signatures while indicating preferences for trading in different
exchanges.
You should carefully note all the charges/ fees/ brokerage that are applicable on your
accounts and keep a record of the same.
Identify the segments in which you would like to trade (cash, F&O, Currency Derivative or
any other segments). Trading in derivatives requires understanding of the derivative
products.
In case you want to avail additional facilities namely Running Account facility, execution of
Power of Attorney, etc., you will have to give specific authorization to the stock broker in
order to avoid any dispute in the future.
You should provide your email address and mobile number in the account opening form.
The broker and stock exchanges use these contact details to keep you updated on the
trading updates that are important for you to know.
You should always demand and take a copy of the account opening form for your records.
8
Procedure for opening an account: Know Your Client (KYC) process
While opening of Demat/ Trading/ Bank Account, you have to submit Know Your Client (KYC)
documents. Let us understand what KYC means and why is it compulsory?
KYC is mandatory under the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 and Rules framed thereunder.
While opening of Demat / Trading/ Bank account, client
IDENTITY CARD
have to submit Officially Valid Documents (OVDs) as
ID: 12345678912345678
Name:
proof of identity and proof of address and these AN dA rM esE s S : URNAME
123 ANYWERE STREET
CITY, 12345-875.
documents form a part of the KYC requirements. An Phone: Expedition Date:
+5581487898 00/00/00
investor can establish his identity and address through
relevant supporting prescribed documents such as PAN
card / UIDAI-Aadhar/ Passport/ Voter ID card/ Driving Proof of Address
license, etc. Once the KYC form is submitted, a unique ID N LE a aN m sT e tI NFI aC mAT eION NUMBR
Address
KYC Identification Number (KIN) is generated and Birthdate Gender
communicated to the client by SMS/ Email. KYC is a
one-time process and is valid across all the
intermediaries. You need not undergo the same process
again while opening an account with another
intermediary in securities market.
Page 11
--- PAGE 16 ---
e-KYC
Investors can complete KYC process using e-KYC facility using UIDAI - Aadhaar/ Digi Locker.
Fill the account opening details/ form online in the Stock Broker’s website.
Submit scanned images of the mandatory documents/POA (Proof of address) /
POI(Proof of Identity).
Complete IPV (In Person Verification) process over video call.
Digitally Sign the document.
Account gets activated.
Tips
- Ensure that you read and understand all the documents before signing.
- Do not sign any blank document.
- Always refer to the Do’s and Don’ts mentioned in the Annexure of the account opening kit.
- Ensure to register YOUR mobile number and email address with the bank, depository
participant and stock broker to receive SMS and email alerts regarding transactions in your
account.
9
Basic Services Demat Account (BSDA)
Basic Services Demat Account (BSDA):
Basic Services Demat Account is the demat account facility which is provided to individuals who
have only one demat account (across all depositories) and the value of the holdings doesn’t
exceed Rs.2 lakhs each for non-debt securities (like equities) and debt securities, at any point of
time.
The Annual Maintenance charges (AMC) structure for BSDA is as mentioned below:
Security Type Slabs Value of Holdings Charges
For Non - Up to Rs. 50,000/- No AMC
Debt Securities
Rs. 50,001 to Rs. 2,00,000/- Up to Rs. 100/-
Up to Rs. 1,00,000/- No AMC
For Debt Securities
Rs. 1,00,001 to Rs. 2,00,000/- Up to Rs. 100/-
Page 12
--- PAGE 17 ---
Please check the website of SEBI or the respective Depository for the latest rules in this regard.
A combination of the above mentioned three accounts (i.e. a bank account, a demat account and
a trading account) is often referred to as the “3-in-1” account. The investors may either open the
above mentioned three accounts separately with different depository participant/ broker/
institution or they may also approach a single depository participant/ broker / institution who
provides the facility of opening of all the three accounts together.
The list of SEBI registered stock brokers and depository participants may be obtained from SEBI’s
official website (www.sebi.gov.in) or from the websites of the respective Stock Exchanges or
depositories.
10
Power of Attorney
Power of Attorney is a document of high
importance as it is capable of giving your rights
and access over your accounts and money to POA
somebody else. In securities market, a client may
execute the power of attorney (PoA) in favour of
the stock broker and/or depository participant to
authorize them to operate his demat and bank
account to facilitate the delivery of shares and
pay-in/ pay-out of funds. A specific Power of
Attorney (PoA), as per the guidelines of SEBI, may
be executed by the client in favour of the stock
broker / depository participant.
As per SEBI guidelines, it is not mandatory to sign and issue a power of attorney. Signing of Power
of Attorney is purely optional and voluntary – if you find that signing power of attorney is useful for
you, you may sign it. You can also revoke the Power of Attorney at any point of time.
In case any transfer of shares is done by your stock broker in your account, for any reason other
than those that are authorized by you under POA, you should immediately take up the matter with
your stock broker. In case no response is received from them or you are not satisfied with the
response, you should immediately take up the matter with the Depository/Exchange.
In case you wish to execute a Power of
Attorney (PoA) in favour of the Stock Broker /
Guidelines
Depository Participant, please refer to the
guidelines issued by SEBI/ Stock Exchanges/ https://www.sebi.gov.in/
Depositories available at their respective
official websites.
Page 13
--- PAGE 18 ---
11
Nomination
Nomination is a facility that enables an individual investor
to nominate a person, who can claim the securities held
by him/ her in their demat accounts or the redemption
proceeds thereof (in respect of mutual fund units) in the
event of death of the investor.
How do I invest in Securities Market?
12
Investment through Primary Market
When an issuer company issues shares to the general
public through public offer, you can apply for the shares
by submitting the necessary application form. For
issuance of securities, the issuer company has to follow
certain rules, regulations, etc. Shares will be allotted as
per the prescribed Rules & regulations. The shares
allotted will be credited in the applicant’s Demat Account
maintained with DP. Allotment of securities will be made
in demat form and investors have a choice of
subsequently getting them converted to physical shares.
On closure of public issue, within six (06) working days of
closure of the issue, shares allotted are listed on the
recognized Stock Exchanges where further trading of the
shares takes place.
Please Note:
As per latest SEBI guidelines, you can opt to hold securities such as share certificates in
physical form or Demat form. However, with effect from April 01, 2019, securities can be
transferred only if the same are held in Demat form. It is therefore advisable to open a demat
account and hold all the securities in demat form. This rule is not applicable if the shares are
to be transmitted to their legal heirs by way of inheritance or succession.
Page 14
--- PAGE 19 ---
13
Process of investing in Primary Market
You can buy shares of a Company directly from
the company during the public offer/ issue by
filling up an application form and making
payment during the period when the public issue
is open for issue to the public. In the application
form, you have to fill your details such as name,
address, number of shares applied for, bank Application Form
account details, demat account in which shares
are to be credited, etc.
Investors who are interested in investing in that
IPO may then apply for the same through
Application Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA)
and also by using Unified Payment Interface (UPI)
as a payment mechanism (mentioned later in the
booklet in detail). Investors will then have to fill
up the application form and apply for allocation
of shares to them as per their preference. The
money for the shares for which the investor has
applied, then gets blocked in the bank account of
the investor. The entire process of listing of an
IPO takes six (06) working days after the closure 6 Days
of the issue. The investors to whom the shares
are issued, get the shares in their demat account
and the funds for the same get debited from their
bank account. In case the shares aren’t
allocated, the funds blocked in the applicant
investor’s bank account gets released for further
utilization.
Word of caution:
- Read carefully the prospectus/ red herring prospectus/ offer document of the company
before making investment in shares of a company.
- Take due care about the price and quantity of shares while applying for the shares in the
public issue.
- Keep a note of the price at which you applied for shares.
- Don’t invest on the basis of market sentiments, rather analyze about the company and its
financials and invest smartly.
Page 15
--- PAGE 20 ---
14
Application Supported by Blocked Amount (ASBA)
Investors can now apply for securities in IPOs
through ASBA. In ASBA, money to the extent of
price of the shares for which the investor has
applied, is blocked, but it remains in your
account till allotment. Upon allotment of shares,
etc., requisite amount is debited from your
account. Blocked amount continues to earn
interest and there is no requirement of refund in
case of non-allotment. Thus, instead of actually
sending a cheque for applying in IPOs you can
now apply through Application Supported by
Blocked Amount (ASBA) which is facilitated by
certain branches of collecting banks. List of
these banks is available on the website of SEBI.
Investors can now invest in IPOs by using Unified
Payment Interface (UPI) as a payment
mechanism. The process of investing using UPI is
explained at Annexure-IV.
15
Investment through Secondary Market
Once you have opened a trading/ broking
`
account with a stock broker of a recognized Stock
Exchange, you can buy or sell shares of a `
company through the stock broker at the stock
`
exchange. You can place the order for purchase
`
or sale of securities through your broker using the
`
online trading account by visiting broker’s
website, mobile trading app of broker, through
the phone using Call & Trade facility, by physically
visiting the broker’s office or through Authorized ` ` `
Persons of stock brokers.
Page 16
--- PAGE 21 ---
Modes of placement of Order:
Mobile Trading Online Trading
App App
Buy Stocks at
Place orders on the Exchange Physical Order
Phone with Broker
Word of caution:
- Buying or selling of shares should be done only through a SEBI registered stock broker or
Authorized Person.
- Always keep a record of the orders placed by you to the broker, while trading in secondary
market.
16
Trading days and Trading & Settlement Cycle
Trading on the Stock Exchanges takes place on
all days of the week (except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays declared by the Stock Exchanges).
In case of purchase of shares, you are required to
make payment to the bank account of your stock
broker prior to the pay-in day for the relevant
settlement (preferably immediately after
receiving confirmation from the broker that your
purchase order is successfully executed).
Similarly, in case of sale of shares, you are
required to deliver the shares to the demat
account of broker prior to the pay-in day for the
relevant settlement.
What is the pay-in day and pay-out day? Pay-in day is the day when the brokers shall make
payment or delivery of securities to the clearing corporation of the exchange. Pay-out day is the day
when the clearing corporation makes payment or delivery of securities to the broker. Settlement
cycle is on a T+2 rolling settlement basis w.e.f. April 01, 2003 (where T stands for the trade day).
For example, the trades executed on a Monday are typically settled on the following Wednesday
Page 17
--- PAGE 22 ---
(considering 2 working days from the trade day). Stock Exchanges ensure that the pay-in and
pay-out of funds and securities are carried out on T+2 day.
Pay-in of funds/ securities refers to the transfer of funds/
securities from brokers account to the exchange’s account.
Pay-out: Pay-out of funds/securities refers to transfer of
funds/securities from Exchange account to Broker account.
Word of caution:
- Always ensure that you keep adequate funds/ securities in your bank/ demat account,
respectively, before the date of pay-in of the settlement cycle of the trade.
- Non-availability of sufficient funds/ securities for settlement may lead to levy of penalty
and further losses for the investor.
17
Contract Note
A Contract Note is an evidence of the trade done
by the stock broker. It is a legal document which
contains details of the transaction such as
securities bought/ sold, traded price, time of
trade, brokerage, etc. Contract Notes can be
issued in physical form or in electronic form. In
case you opt for an electronic contract note, a
specific authorization needs to be given to the
stock broker along with the details of your email
ID. Such electronic contract notes shall be
digitally signed, encrypted and can’t be
tampered. Such contract notes should be
Page 18
--- PAGE 23 ---
preserved by the investor for future references. These have huge importance, especially if any
dispute arises later.
Word of caution:
- Contract note shall be issued by the stock broker within 24 hours of the execution of the
trade. In case of any discrepancy in the contract note, investor should immediately take up
the matter with the stock broker.
- Always cross check the records maintained by you, while placing orders in the market, with
the details mentioned in the Contract Note. In case of any discrepancy, contact your broker
immediately.
Record of client order:
Stock brokers are required to execute trades of clients only after
keeping evidence of the client placing such order, which could
be, inter alia, in the form of:
a. Physical record written and signed by client,
b. Telephone recording,
c. Email from authorized email ID,
d. Log for internet transactions,
e. Record of messages through mobile phones,
f. Any other legally verifiable record.
18
SMS and Email Alerts to Investors
Investors can opt for SMS and email alerts facility
through which they shall receive free of cost SMS
and email alerts for any trading/ transaction
activity that would happen in their trading and
demat account. In order to avail this facility,
investors should ensure that their mobile
numbers and email IDs are shared and regularly
updated with their stock brokers and depository
participants.
Page 19
--- PAGE 24 ---
19
Running Account Authorization
In normal course, settlement of a transaction
(buy/sell) by a broker has to be done within 24
hours of pay-out of funds / securities. However, if
you regularly trade in shares on the stock
exchange, you may specifically authorize the
stock broker to maintain a Running Account
whereby your shares or funds, as the case may
be, would be kept in a separate account with the
stock broker.
Running Account facilitates ease of carrying out
transactions in securities whereby the shares or
funds kept in the running account with the stock
broker are adjusted towards the settlement
obligations of the future transactions.
Running Account authorization is voluntary and useful for the investors who frequently buy
and sell securities. Running Account authorization shall be dated and revocable at any time.
The actual settlement of the funds and securities shall be done by the broker, at least once in
30 days / 90 days as opted by the investors (client).
20
Trade Verification
Trade Verification module on the websites of
exchanges is a very simple tool to verify the
trades executed in your account. The data on the
trades would be available on T+1 day.
Page 20
--- PAGE 25 ---
21
What is Margin money?
The margin money is prescribed by exchanges /
Clearing Corporations and collected from
investors by brokers before executing a trade on
their behalf. The margin money is collected to
mitigate the risk of non- payment of funds for buy
trades or non-delivery of securities for sell trades
by an investor. Margin can be provide in the form
of cash or securities or cash equivalent i.e. fixed
deposits, bank guarantee, units of mutual funds,
government securities, and treasury bills in
demat form etc.
With effect from September 01, 2020 investors (client) can provide margin in the form of
“securities” only by pledging the securities in favour of specially designated demat account of
stock broker.
Early Pay-in: In case investor wants to avail exemption from payment of margin, investor may use
“early pay-in” facility where payment of funds / delivery of shares shall be made to the broker
before the pay-in date or as per time/date specified by the broker.
22
Statement of Account from Stock Broker and Depository Participants
You are entitled to receive reports such as
monthly report, quarterly report, etc., free of cost,
on a regular basis from brokers and depositories
regarding the transactions done by you.
Depositories and Stock Exchanges, will inform
you on your registered mobile number or email id
regarding the transactions in your accounts.
If you do not understand the message, clarify the matter with the Bank, Depository, Depository
Participant, your Stock Exchange, broker, or call SEBI’s toll free helpline for guidance. Always keep
your contact details updated with the intermediaries so that you receive alerts and account
statements on a timely basis. In case you do not receive such a report, you must raise the matter
with relevant entities.
You are entitled to receive a statement of balance of Funds and Securities as on 31st March
of every year from your stock broker.
Page 21
--- PAGE 26 ---
23
Consolidated Account Statement (CAS)
Consolidated Account Statement (CAS) is a
single/ combined account statement which IIA1CP+NND 52D hIdaA: T53o rmM1eY8 nA2E ,seE 1e 13s:N 4: S :4 2N Y 8U5 3W76 4R 8ET7 5N 9R8 -A 889 EI M7 1 ST 52ET.3 R 4Y E5 E6 TE7C x8 p e0A d0i/t0io0R n/0 D0D ate:
shows the details of transactions made by an CSA
investor during a month across all Mutual Funds
and also other securities held in the demat
account(s). In order to get your CAS, you should
update your PAN card number with your stock
broker/ depository participant.
24
Derivatives Market
Derivatives refers to the financial instruments
which derive their value from an underlying
security or financial instrument. The underlying
products can be equity, commodity, currency, etc.
Derivatives are primarily used by investors for
hedging their position and minimizing the price
risk. Hedging is basically a risk management
strategy in which the investors invest in the
`
instruments strategically to offset the risk of any
adverse price movements.
The players in derivatives may be hedgers, speculators and arbitrageurs and different roles may
be played in different situations.
Futures and Options, or commonly called as F&O segment, are an essential part of the derivatives
segment of the securities market. Futures and options are two different types of derivatives.
A futures contract is a standardized exchange traded contract to buy or sell an underlying product
at a predetermined price on a future date.
An options contract refers to the financial instrument which gives the buyer of the option the right
but not the obligation to exercise the option at a pre-determined date and price. A call option gives
one the right to buy the underlying security and a put option gives one the right to sell the
underlying security. Investors are charged a premium when they buy an options contract.
Page 22
--- PAGE 27 ---
Please note that derivatives are high risk products and mainly used for hedging purposes. This
is not recommended for retail investors.
Mutual Funds and ETFs
25
Mutual Funds
A mutual fund pools in money from many
investors and invests the money in stocks,
bonds, short-term money-market instruments,
other securities or assets, or some combination
of these investments. All mutual funds are
required to be registered with SEBI before they
launch any scheme. Mutual funds can also be
segregated in different categories based on the
objectives of the mutual fund scheme. The
schemes are designed to keep in mind the needs
of various types of investors - risk averse
investors (basically a conservative Investor who
does not want to take high risk), moderate
investors (investors who can take some amount
of risk) and aggressive investors (investors who
are willing to take higher risk in search of higher
returns).
Categorization of mutual funds: Mutual funds are now broadly categorized into five types of schemes
mentioned as below:
A Equity Schemes: Mutual funds which principally invest in stocks/ equities.
Debt Schemes: Mutual funds which principally invest in fixed income securities like
B
bonds and treasury bills.
Hybrid Schemes: Mutual funds which invest in two or more asset classes such as
C
equities, fixed income, cash, etc.
Solution Oriented Schemes: Mutual fund schemes which make their investments as
D
per the goals of individuals like retirement and child planning, etc.
E Other Schemes: All other schemes like Index Funds, Sectoral funds, etc.
Page 23
--- PAGE 28 ---
26
How to invest in Mutual Funds?
Mutual funds normally come out with an advertisement in newspapers publishing the date of
launch of the new schemes. Investors can also contact the agents and distributors of mutual funds
who are spread all over the country for necessary information and application forms. While
investing in mutual funds, the investors will first have to complete their KYC process. An investor
can either do a physical KYC at the branch of the fund or at the registrar office. Alternatively, an
individual can also do e-KYC using his Aadhaar card and his PAN card number.
Once the KYC process is complete, the investor then has to decide upon the scheme that he wants
to invest in. This decision is based on the risk appetite and financial goals. When the investor has
shortlisted the mutual fund scheme, he will have to fill up the necessary application forms for
investing in those respective schemes. Forms can be deposited with mutual funds through the
agents and distributors who provide such services or directly with the MF. While filling up the
application form, an investor must mention clearly his name, address, number of units applied for
and such other information as required in the application form. He must give his bank account
number so as to avoid any fraudulent encashment of any cheque/ draft issued by the mutual fund
at a later date for the purpose of dividend or repurchase. Any changes in the address, bank
account number, etc. at a later date should be informed to the mutual fund immediately. In order
to further ease out the investment procedure for the investors, Mutual Funds offer the following
options in addition to the lumpsum investment:
Systematic Investment Plans: Facility to invest fixed amounts in a particular
scheme at regular intervals.
Systematic Withdrawal Plans: Facility to withdraw fixed amounts from a particular
scheme at regular intervals.
Systematic Transfer Plans: Facility to transfer funds from one scheme to another at
regular intervals.
27
Product Labelling of Mutual Funds
As per SEBI guidelines, mutual fund schemes are to be labelled
according to the level of risk involved and the same is to be
depicted on the risk-o-meter. The risk-o-meter with different
labels of risk is depicted as below:
Page 24
--- PAGE 29 ---
a) Low: Principal at low risk
b) Low to Moderate: Principal at moderately low risk
c) Moderate: Principal at moderate risk
d) Moderately High: Principal at moderately high risk
e) High: Principal at high risk
f) Very High: Principal at very high risk
- Risk-o-meter is evaluated on a monthly basis.
- Mutual Funds/ AMCs shall disclose the Risk-o-meter along with portfolio disclosure for all their
schemes on their respective websites and on AMFI website within 10 days from close of each
month.
Investors should not be carried away by commission/gifts given by agents/distributors for
investing in a particular scheme. On the other hand they must consider the track record of the
mutual fund and should take objective and informed decisions.
28
Exchange Traded Funds (ETF)
An Exchange traded fund (ETF) is a security that
tracks an index, commodity, bonds, or a basket of
assets like an index fund and is traded in the
securities market. In simple words, ETFs are
funds that track indices such as Sensex, Nifty,
etc. When you buy units of an ETF, you actually
buy units of a portfolio that tracks the
performance of the index. ETFs just reflect the
performance of the index they track.
Unlike regular mutual funds, ETFs trade like a common stock on the stock exchange and the price
of an ETF changes as per the trading in the market takes place. The trading value of an ETF
depends on the net asset value of the underlying asstes that it represents. ETFs, generally, have
higher daily liquidity and lower fees than mutual fund schemes.
Page 25
--- PAGE 30 ---
Grievance Redressal in Securities Market
29
SEBI Complaints Redress System (SCORES)
In case of any complaint related to the securities market, you may first approach the concerned
intermediary or company. The concerned intermediary or company shall facilitate your complaint
redressal. In case the grievance remains unresolved, you may approach the concerned Stock
Exchange or Depository against your stock broker or listed company.
If you are still not satisfied with the redressal, you
may lodge a complaint with SEBI through a web
based centralized grievance redressal called
SCORES (SEBI Complaints Redress System). The
address of the SCORES portal is COMPLAINT
http://scores.gov.in. Investors can also lodge
their complaints using the SCORES mobile App
while is available on Android and iOS platforms.
To know more about SCORES, you may call SEBI
Toll-Free helpline numbers - 1800 22 7575,
1800 266 7575. SCORES enables you to lodge
your complaint, follow up and track the status of
redressal of the complaint(s) online, at any time
and from anywhere.
30
Investor Services Cell of Stock Exchange
Investor Services Cells cater to the needs of
investors by resolving the queries of investors,
resolution of investor complaints and by
providing the Arbitration mechanism for
quasi-judicial settlement of disputes.
The Stock Exchanges facilitate the redressal of the grievances of the investors through Investor
Grievance Resolution Panel (IGRP) at NSE and Investor Grievance Redressal Committee (IGRC) at
BSE Ltd and MSE.
In order to facilitate the convenience to the investors in redressing their grievances, these
Exchanges have their Investor Service Centers at the various regions spread across the
country. The detailed lists of these centers are available on the websites of these
Exchanges.
Page 26
--- PAGE 31 ---
31
Arbitration Mechanism
Arbitration refers to a quasi-judicial process of
settlement of disputes between Stock Broker and
investor. When one of the parties feels that the
complaint has not been resolved satisfactorily
either by the other party or through the complaint
resolution process of the Exchange, the parties
may choose the route of arbitration process
available with Stock Exchange.
For further information regarding the list of
investor service centres, process of arbitration
and fees and charges involved, you may visit the
websites of respective stock exchanges.
Information about Unclaimed Shares/ Unpaid Dividend Amount - IEPF
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)
has been established under Section 125 of
`
Companies Act, 2013 and for promotion of
`
investors’ awareness and protection of the
interests of investors. IEPF Authority is a statutory
body, constituted under the provisions of
Companies Act, 2013.
All dividends and Shares which remain unpaid or
unclaimed for seven consecutive years, are
transferred by respective companies to Investor
Education and Protection Fund Authority (IEPF).
Investor or his representatives need to submit
their claim to IEPF Authority to receive unpaid
dividend and/or unclaimed shares.
For more details, investors can visit
http://www.iepf.gov.in/IEPF/refund.html
Page 27
--- PAGE 32 ---
Annexures
32
ANNEXURE – I
(Do's and Don'ts for investing / trading in securities market)
You may consult with a SEBI registered Investment Advisor for your investment needs in
securities market
Invest in a scheme/product depending upon your investment objective and risk appetite.
Insist on a valid contract note/ confirmation memo for trades done within 24 hours of the
transaction. Keep track of your portfolio in your demat account on a regular basis.
Read all the documents carefully before signing them.
You should carefully note all the charges/ fees/ brokerage that are applicable on your accounts
and keep a record of the same.
Keep a record of documents signed, account statements, contract notes received and
payments made.
Periodically review your financial needs / goals and review the portfolio to ensure that the same
are possible to achieve.
Always pay for your transactions using banking channel, i.e. no dealing in cash.
Always keep your information updated. Inform your stock broker / depository participant
whenever there is change in your address or bank details or email ID or mobile number. Since
SIM cards now have the feature of getting ported to different service providers, investors may
keep single mobile numbers attached with their respective accounts. (Mobile number is the key
to all important transactions.)
Avail nomination facility for all your investments. Multiple nominations are allowed in demat
account.
Get your running accounts settled periodically (once in 30 / 90 days, as opted by you).
Page 28
--- PAGE 33 ---
Keep a regular check of your running account.
Examine and review your trading account periodically.
Regular checking of daily SMS and email from Exchange regarding trades done on that day.
Regular checking of Monthly SMS and email from Exchange regarding funds and securities
balances of the investors maintained with the Trading Member.
Don’t borrow money for investment.
Don't deal with unregistered brokers / other unregistered intermediaries.
Don’t pay more than the agreed brokerage/charges to the intermediary.
Don't execute any document with any intermediary without fully understanding its terms and
conditions.
Don’t sign any blank form or Delivery Instruction Slips.
Don’t issue general power of attorney (PoA) in favour of the Stock Broker/ Depository
Participant. Exercise due diligence by issuing a very specific one, if you want to issue a PoA.
In case of disputes, file written complaint to intermediary/ Stock Exchange/SEBI within a
reasonable time.
Dabba Trading is illegal. Even if it appears that you are saving on costs, do not indulge in Dabba
Trading as it offers no benefits of safe and guaranteed trades done on Stock Exchanges.
Do not rely on making your investment decisions on hot tips as a person who wants to offload
securities which may not be marketable may be indulging in it. Disseminating hot tips is also an
illegal activity which should be reported to SEBI.
Never share your password for online account with anyone. Do change the passwords
frequently.
Don’t fall prey to Ponzi schemes, unregistered chit funds, unregistered collective investment or
unregistered deposit schemes.
Don't forget to strike off blank spaces in your KYC documents.
Don't opt for digital contracts, if you're not familiar with computers.
Page 29
--- PAGE 34 ---
33
ANNEXURE - II
(Rights and Obligations of Investors)
(cid:31)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:26)
(cid:25)
(cid:24)(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:30)(cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:30)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:26)
Rights of Investors
Get Unique Client Code (UCC) allotted from broker.
Get a copy of KYC and other documents executed from intermediary.
Get trades executed in only your UCC.
Place order on meeting the norms agreed to with the Member.
Get best price.
Get the contract note for trades executed.
Ask the details of charges levied.
Receive funds and securities on time.
Receive statement of accounts from trading member.
Ask for settlement of accounts.
Get statements as per agreed schedule.
Obligations of Investors
Execute Know Your Client (KYC) documents and provide supporting documents.
Understand the voluntary conditions being agreed with the trading member.
Page 30
--- PAGE 35 ---
Understand the rights given to the Trading Members.
Read Risk Disclosure Document.
Understand the product and operational framework and deadlines.
Pay margins in time.
Pay funds and securities for settlement in time.
Verify details of trades.
Verify bank account and DP account for funds and securities movement.
Review contract notes and statement of account.
34
ANNEXURE - III
(Caution against Unregistered Investment Advisers)
Caution against Unregistered Investment
Advisers
SEBI registers Investment Advisers under SEBI
(Investment Advisers) Regulations, 2013 [Last
amended on July 03, 2020]. "Investment
Adviser" means any person, who for
consideration, is engaged in the business of
providing investment advice to clients or other
persons or group of persons and includes any
person who holds out himself as an investment
adviser, by whatever name called.
The aim of the Regulation is to regulate "investment advice" which refers to advice relating to
investing in, purchasing, selling or otherwise dealing in securities or investment products, and
advice on investment portfolio containing securities or investment products, whether written, oral
or through any other means of communication for the benefit of the client and shall include
financial planning: Provided that investment advice given through newspaper, magazines, any
electronic or broadcasting or telecommunications medium, which is widely available to the public
shall not be considered as investment advice for the purpose of these regulations. Investment
Advisers are supposed to obtain registration from SEBI and follow the Code of Conduct.
It is illegal to act as Investment Adviser without SEBI registration. SEBI is making concerted efforts
to stop such illegal activity. Some unscrupulous and ignorant entities may not get themselves
registered and, or, may not follow the Code of Conduct. Investment Advisers have to limit
themselves to giving advice and they do not handle cash or securities.
Page 31
--- PAGE 36 ---
Some of the malpractices in connection with the activities of registered and unregistered entities
acting as Investment Advisers (IA) reported to SEBI comprise of the following:
X
Assured returns being offered by the investment advisers to the clients.
X Charging exorbitant fees from client with a false promise of handsome
returns.
Mis-selling by IA without adhering to the risk profile of the client to earn
X higher fees. On receiving complaints for refund of fees from client for
loss incurred, IA offer higher risk products to clients with a promise that
they will recover their losses.
X
Trading on behalf of the clients.
Automatically upgrading or changing the service to higher risk
X
products, not matching with the client profile and without the consent
of the client.
X Poor service by the IA causing loss of money to the clients. - Refund
related issues.
Investors therefore need to be aware and guard themselves against above mentioned practices
present in the market and deal with caution with entities claiming expertise in capital markets.
Investors are advised to take advice for investment only from entities registered under SEBI
(Investment Adviser) Regulations, 2013 [Last amended on July 03, 2020].
The list of such entities is available at the following website: https://www.sebi.gov.in.
Do’s and Don’ts while dealing with Investment Advisers
Do’s Don’ts
Always deal with SEBI registered Investment Do not deal with unregistered entities.
Advisers.
Check for SEBI registration number. The list Don't fall for stock tips offered under the
of all SEBI registered Investment Advisers is pretext of investment advice.
Page 32
--- PAGE 37 ---
available on SEBI website. Do not give your money for investment to the
(https://www.sebi.gov.in) Investment Adviser.
Ensure that the Investment Adviser has a Don't fall for the promise of assured returns.
valid registration certificate.
Pay only advisory fees to your Investment Don't let greed overcome rational investment
Adviser. decisions.
Make payments of advisory fees through Don't get carried away by luring
banking channels only and maintain duly advertisements or market rumours.
signed receipts mentioning the details of
your payments.
Always ask for your risk profiling before Avoid doing transactions only on the basis of
accepting investment advice. phone calls or messages from any
Investment Adviser or its representatives.
Insist that Investment Adviser provides Don't take decisions just because of
advisory strictly on the basis of your risk repeated messages and calls by Investment
profiling and take into account available Advisers.
investment alternatives.
Ask all relevant questions and clear your Do not fall prey to limited period discount or
doubts with your Investment Adviser before other incentive, gifts, etc. offered by
acting on advice. Investment Advisers.
Assess the risk—return profile of the Don't rush into making investments that do
investment as well as the liquidity and safety not match your risk taking appetite and
aspects before making investments. investment goals.
Insist on getting the terms and conditions in
writing, duly signed and stamped. Read
these terms and conditions carefully,
particularly regarding advisory fees, advisory
plans, category of recommendations etc.
before dealing with any Investment Adviser.
Be vigilant in your transactions.
Approach the appropriate authorities for
redressal of your doubts / grievances.
Inform SEBI about Investment Advisers
offering assured or guaranteed returns.
Page 33
--- PAGE 38 ---
35
ANNEXURE – IV
(Unified Payment Interface (UPI) in ASBA)
Investors can now invest in IPOs by using Unified
Payment Interface (UPI) as a payment
mechanism. UPI is a system that powers multiple
bank accounts into a single mobile application
(of any participating bank), merging several
banking features, seamless fund transfers &
merchant payments into one single mechanism.
How to invest using UPI:
The process of investing in IPO through UPI involves 3 major steps as mentioned below:
A
Bidding through UPI: Investors should fill the bid details in the application form
along with their UPI ID. The applications may be submitted with the intermediary
who will upload the bid details along with UPI ID in the stock exchange bidding
platform. The stock exchange will electronically share the bid details, along with
investors UPI ID with the Escrow/ Sponsor bank appointed by the issuer company.
B
Blocking of funds: The Escrow/ sponsor bank will request the investor to authorize
blocking of funds equivalent to applicant amount and subsequent debit of funds
in case of allotment. Upon validation of block request by the investor, the funds
would then be blocked in the investors account and the investors will be informed
of the same.
C
Payment for shares post allocation process: Once the shares are allocated, the
process of debiting of funds from investors account would take place and excess
money would be unblocked. This process would take place on the basis of the
authorization given by investor using UPI PIN at the time of blocking of funds.
Page 34
--- PAGE 39 ---
Points to remember while using UPI for investing in IPO:
- Create your UPI ID with a bank whose name is mentioned in the ‘List of Self-Certified
Syndicate Banks (SCSBs) eligible to act as an Issuer Bank, available on website of SEBI.
- Use only those mobile applications and UPI handles that are mentioned in the ‘List of
mobile applications for using UPI in public issues available on website of SEBI.
- Submit your application forms with UPI as a payment mechanism only to a Syndicate
Member, or a Registered Stock Broker, or a Registrar and Transfer Agent or a Depository
Participant.
- The limit for IPO application is Rs.2 Lakhs per transaction on UPI and is available only for
retail individual investors.
- Third party UPI ID or investors using a third party bank account will not be considered for
allocation.
36
ANNEXURE - V
(GLOSSARY)
Sr No A b b r e v i ation Full Form
1. AMC Annual Maintenance Charges
2. ASBA Application Supported by Blocked Amount
3. BSDA Basic Services Demat Account
4. CAS Consolidated Account Statement
5. CDSL Central Depository Services (India) Limited
6. Demat Dematerialized
7. DP Depository Participant
8. IA Investment Advisers
9. IGRC Investor Grievance Redressal Committee
10. IGRP Investor Grievance Resolution Panel
11. IPO Initial Public Offer
12. KIN KYC Identification Number
13. KYC Know Your Client
14. MII Market Infrastructure Institutions
15. MSE Metropolitan Stock Exchange of India Limited
16. NSDL National Securities Depository Limited
17. NSE Ltd. National Stock Exchange of India Limited
18. PAN Permanent Account Number
19. PoA Power of Attorney
20. SCORES SEBI Complaints Redress System
21. SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India
22. SMS Short Message Service
23. UCC Unique Client Code
24. UID Unique Identification
Page 35
--- PAGE 40 ---
Investor Awareness Initiatives of SEBI
A. Resource Persons Programs :
Financial education programs conducted by SEBI empanelled Resource Persons in tier II/ tier
III cities/ towns and in their local languages for various target groups like retired persons,
home makers, self-help groups, working executives, etc.
B. Visit to SEBI Programs :
Investor awareness programs conducted for students from college, schools and professional
institutes who visit SEBI offices for these programs.
C. Regional Seminars :
Investor Education programs conducted by SEBI in coordination with Stock Exchanges,
Depositories, AMFI, Commodities Derivatives Exchanges etc.
D. Investor Awareness Programs through Investors Associations (IAs) :
Investor education programs in securities market conducted by SEBI recognised Investors
Associations (IAs) in tier II/ tier III cities/ towns.
E. Investor Awareness Programs through Commodities Derivatives Trainers (CoTs) :
Investor education programs in commodities derivatives conducted by SEBI recognised
Commodities Derivative Trainers (CoTs) in tier II/ tier III cities/ towns.
F. Investor Awareness Programs through Securities Market Trainers (SMARTs) :
Investor education programs in Securities Market conducted by SEBI recognised Securities
Market Trainers (SMARTs) in tier II/ tier III cities/ towns.
Details of these Investors awareness programs can be found at SEBI Investor website:
http://investor.sebi.gov.in
Page 36
--- PAGE 41 ---
FAQs and online resources available at websites of :
Website: www.sebi.gov.in
Investor website: http://investor.sebi.gov.in
Website : www.bseindia.com
Website : www.nseindia.com
Website: www.nsdl.co.in
Website : www.cdslindia.com
Website: www.msei.in
Page 37
--- PAGE 42 ---
Securities and Exchange Board of India
SEBI Bhavan
Plot No.C4-A,'G' Block, Bandra Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai - 400 051
Tel: +91-22-26449000 / 40459000 l Website: www.sebi.gov.in
Investor website: http://investor.sebi.gov.in
Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS): Tel : +91-22-26449950 / 40459950
Toll Free Investor Helpline: 1800 22 7575 and 1800 266 7575
For Investor complaints: https://scores.gov.in
BSE Ltd.
25th Floor, P. J. Towers, Dalal Street, Fort, Mumbai - 400 001
Tel. : 022 22721233/34
Website: www.bseindia.com
E-mail Id: is@bseindia.com
National Securities Depository Limited
Trade World, ‘A’ Wing, 4th & 5th Floors, Kamala Mills Compound,
Lower Parel, Mumbai - 400 013
Tel.: (022) 2499 4200 | Fax: (022) 2497 6351
Investor Helpline No. 1800 1020 990 / 1800 224 430
Website: www.nsdl.co.in
National Stock Exchange of India Ltd.
Exchange Plaza, C-1, Block G, Bandra Kurla Complex,
Bandra (E), Mumbai - 400 051
Tel No: (022) 26598100 - 8114
Fax No: (022) 26598120
Central Depository Services (India) Limited
Marathon Futurex, A Wing, 25th Floor, Mafatlal Mills Compound,
N. M. Joshi Marg, Lower Parel (E), Mumbai - 400 013.
Toll free help line: 1800-200-5533
Website: www.cdslindia.com
Metropolitan Stock Exchange of India Limited
205 A, 2nd floor, Piramal Agastya Corporate Park, Sunder Bung Lane,
Kamani Junction, L.B.S. Road, Kurla-West, Mumbai - 400 070.
Office: +91 22 6112 9000
For Free Circulation
